Welcome back to the data science hangout everybody and welcome to the last data science hangout of
2024. If we haven't had a chance to meet before, I'm Rachel, I lead customer marketing at Posit
and I'm based in the Boston area so if you ever want to grab coffee or get together I'm in Boston.
Posit builds enterprise solutions and open source tools for people who do data science with both R
and Python. We are also the company formally called RStudio just in case anybody needs to hear that
but I'm joined by my lovely co-host today Libby. Libby do you want to introduce yourself?
Hello everybody I'm Libby, I'm a community manager who works with Posit to help our beautiful hangout
community thrive and I'm also a Posit Academy mentor so speaking of R and Python I teach both
R and Python, I mentor both R and Python for Posit Academy to help working professionals
learn R and Python and use them in their data work. We're so happy to have you joining us today.
If this is your first hangout let me just tell you a little bit about it. So the hangout is our
open space to hear what's going on in the world of data across all different industries, to get to
chat with others about data science leadership and connect with other data community members
who are facing similar things as you and we get together here every Thursday at the same time,
same place, of course not if it's a holiday week so we will be on a little bit of a holiday break
and coming back January 9th but if you are watching this as a recording on YouTube and you
want to join us live in the future there will be details to add it to your own calendar below but
thank you so much to those who have helped make this the friendly and welcoming space that it is
and we're all dedicated to keeping that it that way so if you ever have feedback for me about
your experience anything you want to share with me anonymously or maybe suggestions for topics
I'll share a Google form in the chat with you right now but feel free to use that you can always
reach out to me directly on LinkedIn too. And here at the hangout we love hearing from you it doesn't
matter what your years of experience are, what your title is, what industry you're in, or what languages
you use or do not use, you are welcome here in the spaces for you. I encourage you to connect with
each other in the chat so introduce yourself, say hi, say where you are and what you do, by the way
I'm in San Antonio, Texas, and then also what you like to do for fun that's often the way that we
connect best with each other right. Feel free to share your LinkedIn profile and also a link to
your website so that people can actually find you once this Zoom chat goes away. If you are hiring
for any roles please put them in the chat we would love for everybody in the community to benefit from
that exposure and then if you're looking for a role let people know that you're looking what
you're looking for, where you're located, all that stuff. Okay so this is a community-driven
discussion that we're going to be having with Hannes and that means that you ask the questions.
There are three ways to jump in, you can raise your hand on Zoom, we'll just call you to ask
your question. You can put a question in the Zoom chat and if you can't ask it, maybe your mic's not
working or you're somewhere loud, put an asterisk somewhere in there at the beginning of the or the
end and we will ask it for you. And then we also have a Slido link where you can ask questions
anonymously. Isabella just put that in the chat. Perfect, very quick shout out. You'll see in my
virtual background I have a shout out to Posit Comms. Just letting everybody here know that
registration is now open and it's going to be the lowest price that the tickets are ever going to be
so I just want to make sure I tell everybody that here, didn't want to forget. With all that,
thank you so much for being here. Libby and I are so excited to be joined by our other co-host today,
Hannes Muelleheysen, co-founder and CEO of DuffDB Labs. Hannes, I would love to have you
introduce yourself first and share a little bit of what you do at work but also something you
like to do for fun outside of work. All right, well thanks for having me. I'm really, you know,
really happy to see so many people. On the Thursday before Christmas I was a bit concerned
but my name is Hannes. I mean, yes, I work at DuffDB Labs but I'm also
academic so I'm also a professor at university. I teach data engineering and I'm also active
in the open source space that we make a database system called DuffDB and it's an open source
project and, you know, it takes most of my time so at some point we spun out of the
research world into a company, DuffDB Labs, where I'm now sitting. I'm still at the office.
It's here in Amsterdam where it's the longest stretch. We haven't seen the sun in 30 years
so nice. And yeah, so what I do, yeah, I'm leading the company and I'm still hacking around
at DuffDB so today was a glorious day because I got to just sit here and hack around because it's,
you know, it's kind of quieting down for the holidays and it's really amazing so I
did some stuff. But anyways, what do I do outside work? I like boats so I live on a houseboat with
my family in Amsterdam. I actually can drive around so sometimes I do that and when we're
not driving around it's usually some maintenance issues that have to be addressed which I also
really love. I'm a practical person. I like fixing things and so I also like making software. It has
somehow, it's connected. Making software and fixing things, I don't know why.
Yeah, so does that answer your first question? Yes, absolutely. My second question is going to
be can you explain DuffDB to me like I'm five? For anybody here who hasn't used DuffDB,
who doesn't know what it's about or why anyone would ever use it?
Right, so it's kind of funny because DuffDB is a data management system, okay. It speaks SQL,
it's, you know, can do transactions, it can store data tables, these kind of things.
Quite traditional in that sense but it's quite new in the sense that it's how it's deployed.
It can run anywhere. It can run in your, you know, Python shell, it can run in your R shell,
it can run in the browser, it can run on your phone, it can, you know, kind of,
it kind of puts a technology that used to be sort of locked up in one place and can kind of,
because we used to have like data warehouse servers and they were really like one place.
And DuffDB really sort of opens that up in sort of deployment sense and you can put it anywhere.
Now, it's interesting because it was really built with Anthony D'Amico, maybe some people
know him. He did like asd3.com, it's like just to analyze survey data with R.
And at some point, we started talking about, you know, the American community survey which
was creating issues because there were too many Americans or something.
And this is, you know, there were too many rows, what can I say. And so he started like exploring
database technology to make that work. And from these discussions over many years, it's been almost
10 years now that we had the initial discussions, we started designing a database system from
scratch that can do that. And so yeah, DuckDB is open source. It's the fastest growing database
system I think ever. We are sort of, there's some of these metrics that we're tracking,
kind of interesting to see that. It's free, anybody can use it. It's used all over the place.
The company is huge and small. And we have a soft spot for data science since because of
kind of that was the original sort of mental discussions or the initial
discussions that eventually led to it came out of interactions with, you know,
the R community specifically. So that's why we've been working with people. I mean,
I've been working, we have been working with Posit to make that player, but also it's just
generally the R community. We've been spending quite a lot of time because it's really
great as inspiration to see what people's data problems are, right? Like we are database systems
people. We're like, okay, what are the actual problems? And you find interesting problems like,
Hey, I need to, I'll just wear like accidentally unmuted. Yeah. Because yeah, you'll just,
you'll just, you know, I need, need to import CSV files or something like that. And these are
things that are very unwieldy. It can be very unwieldy and we've spent a lot of time on it
because it's such a relevant thing. So yeah, DuckDB, it's a, it's a piece of software.
You can, you can write SQL queries. You can have a bit of a syntax tree and you can have
all these things. Yeah. Awesome. Thank you. And I think that the thing that I've gleaned
from people, because I have not had a need to use DuckDB. And so I'm coming at this from like a,
I don't know all the answers standpoint is that when people need to work with data, that's bigger
than working memory and they can kind of create a temporary database on their system and store that
in disk instead of in working memory. Is that right? That definitely can be done. It doesn't
have to be temporary. It can also just be, you can just keep your data in the database.
Absolutely. It becomes interesting. So people generally say, right, Excel stops working at,
you know, a hundred thousand rows. R maybe stops working at, I don't know, 10 million or something
like that. It's like base R, dplyr, that kind of stuff. And then, so DuckDB is kind of for this
mid range where you go, you know, let's say up to a couple of billion of rows or something like
that. That's really where people used to go for like these big data solutions in the past.
And now you have like an engine where that can get you, get you sort of much further on your,
on your local laptop, right? Because you have your laptop already paid for it. It's there
sitting there. It can do, it can do surprisingly a lot of computation, but indeed if you're,
you know, if your biggest file is 15 megabytes, then there is probably no need for it.
Does it make sense?
Yes. Thank you. Thank you. So Hannes, one of the takeaways for me from Hangouts
this year, and I was thinking about our conversation a few weeks back is around like
getting, like finding the things that people might not think are cool and focusing on them.
And I was thinking back to when Marco Gorelli was also talking about like getting excited about
things that people might think are boring. And I've just been thinking about for myself,
what are those areas that I want to dive deeper into? And I was wondering if you could talk to
us a little bit about that. But working on things that are boring. Yeah, it's very,
I don't know. I don't think there's boring things.
I guess it's more so like your thoughts on that and you sharing like advice for
finding opportunities where there are things that might be uncool to others. Like how did you start
databases? Yeah. So I think in general, there's really no shortage on sort of ideas on what to
work on. And I think personally there is a bunch of, I really like looking at Stack Overflow and
Reddit and see what people kind of, what kind of problems people have. Right. And then you can see,
oh, you know, like, and really you have to squint, right. Because like one specific person's
issue is not really interesting because there's so many of them. But if you see the same exact
sort of class of problems sort of coming up, you know, 10,000 times, then maybe, you know,
there is, there is something there. So one of the things that we, that we did was we were teaching
these courses with Spark. Maybe some people now have worked with Spark. So I was teaching a course
with Spark. Yeah. It wasn't a great success because people generally didn't manage to work
with Spark. So we were like, okay, here's how you Spark. We tried to teach them how, here's how you
operate this thing. Obviously we had some concept on how to do it. But then nobody managed. And
these were not, you know, these were not, you know, toddlers. These were like people who had been
around data for ages and they just couldn't manage. And after a couple of years of giving this
course, we thought, we started thinking like, yeah, maybe, maybe there's, maybe there's something
there. Maybe, maybe that doesn't have to be so difficult to, I don't know, write a parquet file.
Right. So, and I really encourage also all my colleagues in research and in the open source
space, it's like, it's so easy to, I mean, people tend to want to set their own agenda and then just
basically execute that. But I feel like for me, I really want to, you know, address an issue. And
for that, really, there's, there's really, there's so much information, there's so much, so many
resources on, you can just download the Reddit dump or whatever it's called. And then, and just
start, you know, analyzing it and you will see, you know, what are the, what are the things people
struggle with? You know, I can't get this to work, you know, just search for that. And then you have
some idea. And that's, and that's, I think also part of the, you know, that's also part of the
secret of maybe the tidyverse that this really addresses a need that, that, that, or this idea
that you have to have some concept of what your data should look like. That, that's also, I think,
a result of just seeing people struggle for a long time. Yeah. Thank you. Mike, I see you asked a
question earlier in the chat, and I think this is always a fun one to talk about. Do you want to
jump in? Mike Smith. Sorry, frantically coming off mute. This is probably the Christmas season type
question. So why duck? Why duck? Yeah. So there used to be a duck called Wilbur and he was my pet
duck. And he lived with me on the boat and it was very cute. Very cuddly duck. Who could
have imagined that ducks can be cuddly? But yeah, so he eventually flew away and, you know, we like
to think started a ducky family somewhere, but he, in his, in his, in his memory, DuckDB is
called DuckDB. Yeah. A little Wilbur. I have a picture here somewhere. Hang on.
Yes. Duck pictures. We demand them. Duck pictures. Libby, did you bring your stuffed
animal duck? No, I didn't. I thought about it. It was all dusty. So here's, this is little Wilbur.
You can see him there. This is me on the other side, obviously. And he's just standing there
hanging out, you know, being happy, being very loud. Ducks are loud, man. Ducks are loud. I love
ducks. I have a, I have a bit of a duck collection. Duck books, duck stuffed animals. Well,
I have some, there's some amazing questions that are popping up in the chat. So we've totally got
to get to some of them. Marcos, you had a great question. Do you want to jump in? Yes. Can people
hear me? Do you remember? Yes. Yes. Yes. My question is, I've used DuckDB for some of my
personal projects. Like, it's great at, like, CSV to Parquet if their files are big. It's,
it's, I got the vector data support, which was really helpful, combined with some other simple
small language model stuff. But work, my data's all up in the cloud. My data's all, like, in
Snowflake. Like, how do you see, do you see DuckDB as mainly a tool for, like, kind of researchers
working on the laptops, kind of in, like, academic environments? Or, or do you see a,
a corporate kind of, you know, use case where our data's mostly in the cloud?
Yeah, that's a great question. So we do see actually a ton of corporate use. This is the
fastest growing, let's say, area of DuckDB use. So there is a lot of the, sort of, I'm here on
my laptop and I just have to deal with this data sort of use. And that's also where DuckDB came
from, as I've explained. But there's, but there is a ton of use in corporate. And it's less,
let's say, as a sort of complete sort of system, but people use it a lot as a building block.
So say I have, you know, some, for example, if you look at one of the modern BI tools out there,
almost all of them use DuckDB under the hood. If you look at, you know, for example, there's
big sort of data transformation companies like Fivetran that are also using DuckDB under the
hood. So you might not actually realize it that you're, that you're, it's not, it's not like,
it's not like, I don't know, Snowflake, where, you know, you're talking to Snowflake,
you know, you're talking to Snowflake because there's a like little blue logo up in the corner
there. But what we see a lot with, with DuckDB is that people put it in, put it in somewhere and,
you know, just, you can kind of figure it out if you really want to, that it's running
DuckDB under the hood sometimes because, you know, the SQL dialect will have some things that
will give this away. But very often it's also just, you know, pre-baked queries, pre-baked
schemas, just run this thing and people are happy. And that's, that's, that's really fine with us.
So, so we're not, we don't, we don't, you know, it's open source software, people can do whatever
we want, but that's, I think the growth that we see a lot in, in these sort of use cases.
And for people that do want an end-to-end sort of solution, there is MotherDuck, right? There
is a company that is building a DuckDB SaaS, which is, you know, has look and feel, I would say,
similar to Snowflake or BigQuery or, you know, whatever else there is. So there is, so there is,
there's these two things, right? Yeah. And some use cases that are kind of wild. So,
you know, people put it in cars and then I'm like, are you sure? It's like,
but, but yeah, so I think, I think there is a lot of use in, in big, in big tech. It's just
sometimes not visible. Cool. Thank you very much. Thank you. I see Zach asked a question
with an asterisk, so I'll read it, but it was, I believe I read somewhere that DuckDB
can be used with Shiny. Generally, how does it integrate with our Python and data visualization
tools? Yeah, I think there's some, some demos out there, people using DuckDB with Shiny,
generally. So how does it integrate our, and that's, okay, my, my headset is letting me
know that my battery is low, so I will switch to something else. Your audio was like just
clipping and cutting out a tiny bit, but it was still okay. We could hear you. Can you still hear
me? Yep. Yep. Great. So you get to see my ears. But, but, but the question, so the integration
with R is really interesting and it's not like anything you've kind of ever seen, I think,
in terms of data management systems, maybe except with SQLite, because it's this in-process
architecture where the whole thing runs inside whichever process invokes it. So with R, you just
have an R package that's, you know, installed on packages, DuckDB. And that actually is not
a client or a driver, like maybe for other systems, it's actually contains the whole thing.
And then when you start it, it actually runs inside this R process that you're sitting in
front of. And yeah, that has some, some very nice benefits. For example, you can read stuff from
memory. Like if you have a data frame in memory, we can read the data frame. When you have a query
result, you can directly turn that into data frame or error structures. And the same thing
also happens in, in Python, where you can, you can just load the, you know, pip install DuckDB
and install the package. And then you can just load it up inside this Python environment and,
and look at, you know, Pandas data frames or Polar structures or, or IR structures again,
because it's, yeah, it's just right there in this process. And it doesn't have all this like
client service stuff. You don't have to set a password because there's no point of having a
password. It's right there in your thing. It's yours, right? You can, you can do whatever you
want with it. I wanted to just call out quickly. I see Isabella shared in the chat. Sarah Altman
at Posit gave a great webinar yesterday on using DuckDB and Shiny together. Hey, my job is done.
There's a great blog post there and then the, the YouTube recording too.
Great. Elaine, I see you asked a question in the chat just now. Do you want to jump in next?
And nice to see you.
Sure. Hi. So, so I've been reading more about DuckDB and using it in a, in some of the creative
architecture bucket of use cases and doing serverless apps and things. And I, I realized
that there's a lot of things I think I know that I don't really know, like what is a database?
And I, I think in the past I've thought of as a database as something that has to be in the cloud
because lots of things are happening to it in different places. And therefore I have to query
that instead of just, you know, having my, my data files locally, but files can also be in the
cloud and DuckDB can query files. So what is like, I need to update my mental models of a lot of
things. Can you weigh in on how data scientists should think about what a database is and is
DuckDB actually like changing the concept of database or do I just not understand that a
database is always like being created under the hood somewhere? No, I think, I think it's definitely
changing what people, what sort of this conception of, of what that, that what people have of what
a database is and what you alluded to where it lives. Okay. So, I mean, what is a database?
There's there, especially in stats, there is a lot of confusion with the word. So, I mean,
because there is the database, which is just a collection of rows. And then there's the database
management system, which is of course something like DuckDB, which is the system that you used
is confusing terminology, but in principle, it's just a collection of tables, right? And so that
can, and that's, that's, you know, that's what I consider to be a database is a collection of
tables. And then you have, the database management system, which, you know, provides
management of these tables, like, you know, store them, change them, query them most prominently.
And now it's not, not like, and again, in the past, it used to be the case that these things
were sort of, you know, cloud, you know, some, some, some sort of data warehouses also termed
there. It's like a, like a Teradata somewhere, or maybe a green, or I don't know, some Oracle
server somewhere. And that was your database. And it's, it's true that in the past, these things
were kind of locked into these specific pieces of hardware also often because they would just
don't run on anything else. But what we are seeing, and I think that's kind of the point
of DuckDB is that, that you can just pull a lot of this stuff, you know, into places that you
haven't, that you haven't sort of considered yet. And like your laptop is something that it's, I
find it always funny when people sit in front of a $3,000 sort of MacBook that runs a web browser
and nothing else. Right. And then they use that to spend more money on Snowflake in order to query
like a bunch of rows, right. When they have an actually pretty powerful machine sitting right
there. And so what you said, I really liked it's also the creative architecture. It does really
change people's perception, I think, and for people's perceptions also maybe should change in
terms of what does database actually mean. And part of our mission is to, is to maybe reduce the
negative connotation of it with the word, because I think data scientists in particular have been,
how should I say, a bit, a bit fearful or loathsome of database tech in general,
because it's, you know, it worked differently from the other stuff. So it's why we're trying
really hard to, you know, to make it easy to use friendly, these kinds of things. But,
but in principle, yeah, it does actually change the, the architecture. I've done, I've done,
I've done some talks if people are interested on how the two-tier architecture is sort of
no longer up to date because it's just one of like 15 different models of deploying data
management systems. So yeah, it's pretty cool, but it's, it is, I agree. It is, it also took me a while
to realize this from, you know, from, and I'm doing this all day long, so. It's kind of pretty,
maybe. Hannes, we can hear you okay, but it's doing a little bit of a weird like jumbling
thing at the end of some words. I don't know if it's trying to reconnect to your headphones or.
Oh, I can try another. Let me maybe just try another set of, I can just go to my,
it's not, it's not awful, but if it could be better, may as well spend the one minute
to figure it out. Absolutely.
And now I'm going to go to the speakers. So is this better? Yep. You sound good. Great.
And it wasn't really bad. I just wanted to, just in case it stayed the whole time.
That's, that's, that's perfectly fine. I'm sorry about that. No, that's okay.
And I think Libby, you were going to call somebody in from the chat. Yeah. Travis had
some great questions and I, Travis, I have the same question, so I would love you to ask.
Sure. Thank you. So you mentioned that maybe 50 megabyte or less files, maybe DuckDB isn't the
right solution, but are there wrong solution of the saying then you're maybe existing stack
also works fine. I mean, there's no, there's no lower limit if you, if that's what you want to
know. Yeah. Cause I was kind of curious. I, so for example, I work in clinical trials and most
of our data is actually small, but we do often have a lot of relational tables is, is I assume
this could be a good use case for, for DuckDB. There was like, could you walk me through that?
Because I'm sort of a newbie to this stuff, like many here, like what, how does that look for us?
If I, I don't ever want Snowflake because I don't have data that large. But we also do lack
proper databasing practice. I think as an industry, we don't do that in pharma because our
data is so small. So what could you dream up like a stack for me? Yeah, for sure. So I think,
I think, I think you're in bioinformatics. Is that fair to say? Sure. I mean, a lot of it's
actually just straight up clinical data. So we'll have like patients come in because bioinformatics
kind of starts to imply more large data. We don't even have that. It's just going to be like people
and they showed up at a clinic and they had a lab value or something like this. Right. Yeah.
No. So I think, I think what's, what's, what, what really is interesting is what people
sometimes forget is that there's like more to database systems already traditionally than
like just store of tables. And I think what's interesting for things like small,
maybe smallish data is all this integrity sort of dance, right? Where you say, okay,
um, I'll actually define some, some, some relationships here, like, you know, foreign
keys, primary keys, constraints, these kinds of things. And that will actually allow me to keep
my data, um, consistent and, um, with a really good, a transactional system like DrBeats actually
will also make sure that any changes you make to the data will not break any of these constraints.
And that's actually something that I think data frame libraries users in general have just no
concept of because it's never been something they had. Um, but it's pretty standard, uh, in,
in, in, in sort of relational technology. So I think what might be interesting, if you say,
I don't have so huge tables, but, um, they are kind of connected in a complex way. And I need
to do all these funky recombinations. Um, then there's definitely, definitely a great use case
because you, um, yeah, you, you are able to basically go from one consistent stage, another
consistent state and your, um, let's say your value per byte is extremely high, right? Like it,
it's not like that you collected some log files somewhere and it's like probably garbage, but maybe
something interesting is there. It's more like, no, no, no, this took, you know, every row, you
know, was, was, was a whole patient trajectory and that costs, you know, a hundred thousand dollars.
So it's very high value data. Um, and maybe we want to treat high value data better than sticking
it in a CSV file. Maybe we do want to have a schema. Maybe we do want to make sure that we
have the right types. Maybe you want to have the constraints, maybe you want to have the
integrity, uh, relationships on the table. So that's also something that, um, that was actually
in my, in my talk at Posit Conf this year that I tried to sort of make this point where I was
trying to say, Hey, um, yeah, uh, it's, it's, there's more to, to table technology, uh, than,
than just running queries. It's also just all these other guarantees that you kind of get for free.
Um, that, that, uh, that could be interesting for data practitioners.
That's an awesome insight. So where would the, um, the file, I mean, I'm assuming DuckDB,
this is another novice like question, right? So like DuckDB it's serverless is a word. So
there's a file and where does it live? Is it like, do you pass it around? Do people email
DuckDB? Yeah, people do actually. So, uh, it's a fun, fun story. So, um, when you,
when we designed the data file, the format, the file format for DuckDB, uh, you know, way back
when, um, we actually, this use case of people emailing around files was something is definitely
on the, on the board because it's, we saw it happening and, uh, uh, with other things. Um,
no, so how does this work in the deployment model? Well, this depends a bit, right? So,
so for some first depends a bit on how your update process works on how, how often things
are updated, but for example, in easiest case with static data files, what we see a lot of
people putting, uh, these files in a central location, maybe on a cloud storage or something
like that. And then DuckDB can directly query that, right. Or you put, you put this on a,
on your server and you just interact with this file there, like, you know, in the old days with
a mainframe, perhaps. Um, we also see some interesting use cases where people just jury
rig some sort of RPC calls around DuckDB because indeed, um, the multiplayer experience in DuckDB
isn't, isn't the, isn't, it wasn't a design goal and still isn't the design goal. And for that,
you have other things, you have things like MotherDuck that actually that's kind of their
core thing. So they kind of extend this thing with, with a sort of, um, multi-user sort of
sharing capability when you don't have the stuff on your computer. But that's, that's, that's more,
more complex deployments. I think that's, that's a different, it's not a traditional data warehouse.
When you're saying multiplayer, so if I wanted to have multiple users, let's say access their
front end and write new entries to a DuckDB file, um, that's where MotherDuck and other things come
in. Is that right? That is definitely where these come in. I mean, you can definitely have,
if you have like a web application that's sitting on top of a DuckDB file, they can definitely have
multiple users writing it at the same time. It's just that you cannot, I don't know, you cannot
copy that file to another computer and magically have these two things connected. It's just not
what we do. Right. Got it. That's so helpful. Thank you. Thank you. All right. We have a
question from another amazing developer in our open source community. Marco, can you ask your
question live if you're still here? Um, yeah, sure. I would love to. This is an okay forum to
ask this question. Just noticed, uh, upgrading to DuckDB 1.01. Now, if I do lots of operations over
an empty window, like lag over just empty bracket, that now the order of rows is preserved compared
to the input. And before that it didn't used to happen above a certain size, but in the release,
and this seems like an awesome change, but in the release notes, I couldn't find anything about it.
And is this an intentional change in 1.1? Uh, probably. Um, so the thing is the,
we get a bit overwhelmed with the release notes because, uh, it's usually such a gigantic amount
of changes that, that go in that, uh, you mean that it wasn't mentioned in the blog post or it
was just not in the release notes at all? Yeah, not in the release notes. Yeah. Okay. Um, it could,
I mean, there have, this is a window function related change, right? So I'm not the expert
on window function. I did implement the first iteration of it, but since Richard, one of our
guys has taken over, um, and he has been, has been spending a lot of time on the order of window
functions. So I just merged a pull request yesterday with another set of changes to the
order of window functions. So it could be that it's, um, that it's, um, changing it again.
In general, the, um, SQL order is not defined, right? Like SQL systems don't have a defined
order. Um, window functions usually have, uh, have an order defined. So then we can, we can,
we can use that. Um, but, um, we have, we are trying more, let's say to keep the, um, input
order, um, alive. Um, let's say as we go forward, because people just expect it. So it could be that
this was intentional. I'm not entirely sure. Uh, there's so many things going on in DuckDB land
that, uh, that I'm not, you know, that I'm not actually on top of. So that's
not entirely sure, but great to hear it's, uh, it's improved. Okay. Thank you. Great to see you.
Thank you, Isabella. I see you had a question a bit earlier.
Hi everyone. Um, I had a roadmap question if that's all right.
All right. So row-wise operations in dplyr are nice and legible, but they're not as fast as
other options with large databases. Uh, but the data.table package recently implemented
argument for faster row-wise operations. So my question is, um, do you know if DuckDB and
dplyr has any roadmap for faster row-wise operations? Um, you would have to explain
to me what you mean by row-wise operations. Oh, okay. Um, it's like a different way. If I.
No. Isabella, freeze. It's just another way.
Oh, you froze for just a second, but you're back now, Isabella.
Okay. Um, maybe I can follow up with you. It's, it's a way of work.
Okay. We'll jump to the next question. Sorry, Isabella, it keeps freezing, but if you reconnect
after we can jump back. Um, I see there was a Slido question. Now I'm wondering, am I the one
that's frozen? No, no, no. Okay. I can make some movement. Okay. Okay. Perfect. Yeah. Um,
it's still working. You're still alive. Okay. Great. There was a Slido question that was,
how would you describe the culture at DuckDB and what steps do you take to nurture and maintain
that culture within the organization? Um, that's a great question. Um, so the, um,
the culture here at the company or the project, I mean, I can talk about both, right? The, um,
the culture here at the company is, um, a bit like we took what we knew from a research group
and try to improve it where we thought it was going wrong. Um, uh, so, you know, it's a very
sort of, you know, I would say, uh, progress sort of oriented, uh, team here that we, you know,
we, we all, yeah, all very good at database engineering and, um, and, uh, you know, we just
enjoy each other's sort of company. And generally we have a rule that we only hire friendly people
that has worked really well so far. Um, and, uh, in the project itself. So DuckDB is a bit special
because we don't have open governance in DuckDB. So that's, um, it is a open source MIT license.
You can, you know, do whatever you want with it. Um, but there is no, there is no sort of democracy
that sounds a bit terrible. I have to admit, um, there's no democracy in terms of, um, direction
of the project. And that's, that's intentional because we've seen, um, specifically Apache
projects to go down the drain, um, because they couldn't agree on, on, on a vision. And in the
end, just, they just did whatever, you know, everything everyone wanted. And in the end,
they're unmaintainable messes. And, um, it's because we have seen this so many times we've,
um, we just decided that we're gonna keep control over what goes in. Um, so does Mark and me, uh,
the two creators, original creators of DuckDB, um, uh, in, you know, just to, um, you know,
to keep the vision. We do have very strict rules on behavior, like not strict. I would say we do,
and we are very conscious of keeping, uh, productive and friendly tone on things like
GitHub issues, comments. And we, we are, you know, we're trying to, we're trying to really,
really be friendly to anyone. I think we have over the years, we've, I think, banned two people
of our GitHub repo, which is, uh, for really unacceptable behavior, but we are really trying
to have a positive, um, interaction also on our discord and all the other places we interact
with the community. And I think it's worked out really well. The, the, the tone is incredibly
friendly. People want to help each other. So, um, yeah, I think it's also just, you know,
leading by example, there's other open source projects, you know, like Linux where the head
guy in charge is famously grumpy all the time, like that will trickle down through the community.
Um, and we're not doing that. We're, we try to be, you know, consistently friendly. Um,
and it does actually, and I think which shows in the, um, community, but it's also something that
I think, um, Hadley is doing extremely well. It's just this incredible civility that he brought to
the previously grumpy, our community, I think. Thank you. So maybe just a real quick clarification.
So I think we, we find this with our studio being a product and then being the company and
open source and pro product name, and then becoming posit. So how, how are DuckDB and
DuckDB labs separate in like sentences? Yeah. I mean, the DuckDB is the project that's database
projects called DuckDB and DuckDB labs is just the company, the commercial entity that exists
where most of the developers, um, work and, um, where we work with, you know,
corporate partners that have, you know, uh, special corporate needs around DuckDB.
Thank you. Um, Sunday, I saw you ask the question and I, it actually also might answer
Javier's question. Javier, if you wanted to jump in and follow up with Sunday too.
Sunday, go ahead. All right. Sure. Uh, can you hear me? Yep. All right. Um,
oops, one moment. Yeah. Uh, first of all, thank you so much. I'm a big DuckDB enthusiast. Um,
can't remember when last I used SQL light since I found DuckDB. Yeah. Thanks for that. And thanks
for the great things like, you know, group by all, it was long overdue. Um, now thinking about,
um, you know, things like orbital and how that integrates nicely with tidy models and then
post queries, which you could pass into, um, SQL for machine learning. Is any plan for some
support for machine learning as we go into the future with DuckDB? Um, yeah, I think we're quite
happy where we're at in terms of, um, you know, uh, API or general focusing on relational
transformation of tables. I mean, we are sometimes expanding. We recently added like pivot statement,
which is a pivot statement, which is doesn't exist in,
in, um, in SQL in general. So we are expanding there, but we try to keep it focused on,
uh, let's say table-y operations. Um, there are, there are some operations to do simple,
you know, regressions and stuff like that in DuckDB, but it's really not our focus.
There are other tool kits that are great at, um, at machine learning tasks and we try to integrate.
So that's one of the strengths that I think DuckDB has by being in process. We can, for example,
export to, uh, I don't know, scikit-learn fairly efficiently. Um, and then they can do their thing
and we can pull back the results and do something else. It's not like traditional databases, like,
for example, Oracle that have to sort of push everything into the database system itself for
them to be efficient. We can just say, yeah, you want to pull this out and run something in it.
Great. Just do it. It's not going to take forever. Um, so yeah, we try, we try to focus and we're a
small team with 20 people. We need to focus. We need to, you know, only do things we can,
we can sort of do. Uh, and table SQL is already a, um, let's say challenging, uh, target.
Thank you. Thank you. And Javier, does that cover your question as well?
It does, but I do have other questions. Oh, do you want to hop in? Sure. Yeah. Um, so, uh,
I think it was Marco earlier asked about, um, a different Marco asked about DuckDB's kind of
roadmap for interacting with maybe data warehouse data. Oh yeah. Um, is there anything DuckDB can do
today with, um, ADBC, like the ODBC, ADBC competitor? Yeah. So we do have ADBC support,
um, in DuckDB. So for those who don't know, this is like something came out of Voltron,
um, or the Arrow project, uh, where the idea was to update the standard database protocols a bit.
And, uh, we do support, um, ADBC. Uh, we also generally support Arrow ingestion. So if your
database supports Arrow, then you can ingest that into DuckDB quite efficiently. Um, we do have
specialized connectors for things like SQLite, PostgreSQL, MySQL. Um, and what we do have on
the roadmap is a generic ODBC connector that you basically can also just pull stuff out of your
SQL server or Oracle or DB tool, or, you know, these, these, these ancient things, um, into
DuckDB. Um, but we also seeing a lot of interesting developments with things like, um, Iceberg or
Delta Lake where, uh, you know, the, the, the big players are starting to make things accessible
through these interfaces. And, um, yeah, we are, we are working on that, that already works okay
with DuckDB, but we're working also on that, um, to improve that further. So, um, we do see a lot
of use cases where basically, you know, an analyst will just pull some stuff from the production
database into the local DuckDB and then just run with it and, and do analysis on it. That, that
we see a lot and we want to support that more. Yeah. Okay, cool. Awesome. Yeah. I'm looking
forward to using the, uh, the UC catalog extension. Yeah. Yeah. That's, uh, that's, that's, that's
pretty, that's pretty experimental though. So you were warned. Um, and then another just like
request, um, you know, and I know this stuff takes time, it's not priority, but like the way
our users today are accustomed to seeing package documentation, it's very much in the form of like,
here is a vignette that if you've never used this package or tool, like by the end of the vignette,
you'll be able to at least replicate a lot of it. And I feel like DuckDB and Arrow, Polaris,
like these other Polars, even like these other frameworks are sort of written with a software
engineering mindset where it's like, here's my documentation. And the documentation is like,
here's a function name. Oh, and here's the argument names underneath this function.
Like it's very topical, right? So, um, again, like low priority, I love DuckDB. I love what
you guys are doing, but just like more robust documentation, um, would be awesome.
Yeah, I agree. And there's a shout out to Gabor, who is our dev rel, who is really spending a ton
of time on documentation. Um, one thing that we sometimes run into is that the surface is just
so gigantic that it seems like kind of pointless to show you three examples of SQL, right? Like,
because there's just this, it's like trying to teach you programming in the vignette. It's,
it's not entirely the format for it, right? So, so sometimes we say, okay, go, go learn SQL
somewhere else and then come back. Um, or at least because it's, it's difficult, but it's a point
well taken. Um, absolutely that, uh, we could, we could have something a bit more on, on the,
on, on sort of the getting started side there. Yeah, absolutely.
Thank you. Javier, I see Seb just, uh, volunteered you to help update documentation.
I know, I know. I need to do more of this, honestly. Uh, like, I don't know. I just feel
like by the end of the work day, I'm so spent and many others in my shoes are like so spent that we
don't want to contribute back to the open source community, despite us, like literally my bread
and butter is open source at work. So yeah, it's all my 2025 goals. I'll help you out.
Thanks, man. Do you want to jump in next with your question?
Uh, yeah. So, uh, Hey, honest, nice to, uh, nice to see you. Um, my question was kind of around,
and I'm not, I haven't contributed to open source projects, so this may be even just a general
question, but especially since DuckDB is, you know, increasingly used everywhere. I wonder how,
um, how security is evaluated for open source projects. Like, you know, obviously companies
where we work with clinical data or anything like that, it's a, it's a huge possible risk. And so
I'd be curious to see what take from the open source side. Yeah, I think this is an excellent
question. And I mean, it's not, we do get some sort of improvement in the general situation,
but not having client server because there's no server to run. There's no sort of port that can
be accidentally left open or something like that, right? Like there is no, like this whole,
this whole traditional security problem of, oh, you're, you know, you can attack this protocol
over the, you know, with, with some, some crafted numbers or something that we don't have. But there
are, um, there are things that, that, uh, we are, we do have a, we do have a website on our
documentation about securing DuckDB because there are aspects that, that can be surprising. Like
if you're, for example, you're running it somewhere and you're just opening up the SQL
impromptu to the world, expecting nothing bad will happen. Well, uh, bad things can happen
because the SQL prompt is extremely powerful. It would be like opening up an R shell to the world.
You can do it, but you have to be a bit careful, right? So we have a website up that describes
that. Um, the biggest security sort of, um, con concerns we do that we have is around
distribution of binaries, right? So we, um, we make, we build, we build the binaries in our CI
and, um, yeah, we distribute them and CRAN builds binaries and, you know, um, so what we do, we have
to do very, we have to be very careful that nobody manages to implant, um, you know, malicious code
into the stuff that we distribute. Right. So that, that is, I think the thing I am mostly concerned
about and that has that, that kind of, that comes down to like, you know, nailing down your CI, um,
having, you know, signatures on things, having, having sort of, uh, hashes being checked regularly
that to make sure that there's a lot of sort of stuff in the background that we have to do that,
that doesn't really end up that it's not visible in the product, but there are,
we are definitely aware of it. Um, one thing sometimes that's a bit annoying is when some
open source user shows up and, uh, asks me to fill their 40 question security questionnaire,
uh, that does happen. It has happened with NASA even that, uh, you know, they say, oh, we can only
use your thing when you fill this thing. And I'm like, what I'm, what am I supposed to do? I should
fill your questionnaire. I don't, I don't understand, but I mean, some, but if it's somehow reasonable,
we try to help obviously, because we know that it helps the users, but, but it is, it is a,
is definitely something that, uh, I understand people's concerns about, uh, we do offer,
you know, sorry for the plug. We do offer commercial support contracts for people who are,
who want extra assurances. Um, but we try our, you know, our, our, our, our best to, uh, make sure
that the distribution is intact and, you know, not nobody, nobody that pulls a, uh, what's this
X that or whatever it was on us. Appreciate it. Thank you. Um, and I see a question here in the
chat from Sanjay. Did you want to jump in and ask? It has an asterisk, but if you're available to ask.
Oh, hi, this is Sanjay. I had a question around production grade database use. So we have, uh,
IOT, uh, sensors and for thousands of them, which keep sending data and we, we pump them
through MQTT, we pump them into a MariaDB database, which is working fine. Only thing
is when the database grows in size, the querying gets slow. So is, is DuckDB going to help there
where it can write consist continuously every second into a database and then also allow read
simultaneously? Yeah. Um, so the querying thing, yes, I think DuckDB is for complex queries,
something on the order of a hundred or a thousand times faster. So that's, that's really not compared
to my SQL. So that's, that's really not the problem. The problem or the challenge comes
indeed with the ingestion. If you have, so, so DuckDB is a, uses a columnar storage layout,
which means that, you know, the tables are organized in columnar way. Um, and that means that
uh, uh, doing a lot of small appends can be problematic. And that's something that, uh,
but that have, you have to sort of try out to see if the, the right speed can keep up with whatever
you're sending in it. So 10, 10 tends to be the case that row layouts like, uh, my SQL or Postgres
will generally be better at appending quickly, but, um, the querying speed is definitely going
to be better. Yeah, but that's half problem solved only unless we append it. I mean,
it's probably going to work fine. I'm just warning you there's, if you're looking for
transactions per second or something like that, then the row-based guys are probably going to win.
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Thank you.
Libby, do you want to call on the next one? It's hard to pick the final questions when we get down
to these few. It is. I was just thinking five minutes left. Oh my gosh. Um, there's a great
question on Slido, which is when you first came up with DuckDB, did you struggle to get acceptance
from the data industry? And if you did, how did you get over it? Um, so that, yeah, great question.
Um, so we were initially, uh, ridiculed for not having a distributed system and it was our strong
belief and, you know, Hill, we were willing to die on that. You don't actually need distributed
systems in order to query sort of significant amounts of data. And, um, I did, I was like,
you know, I mean, I didn't really worry me so much because I thought, great, this is, you know,
I'll just, I'll just, you know, if that takes 10 years for the world to acknowledge distance,
fine. It actually didn't take all that long. Um, I can't, I was, I was ready to sort of be, be,
um, be ridiculed for, for much longer than, than we actually were. And I think the,
the crazy growth we see with DuckDB and, uh, you know, the, the blog posts like big data is dead
and stuff like that have really changed the data industry in my, in my opinion. And, and so we are
no longer ridiculed. I'm happy to report even, uh, we were working with, with some of the, uh,
big, big, big, big data companies. Um, and, and so, um, yeah, I think that was, that was kind of
the, um, that was a big thing. And of course we are from Europe. Uh, the data industry tends to
ignore things that are not made in, in, in, uh, you know, in the, in the Bay area. Um, that was
also something I was a bit concerned about in the beginning was like, yeah, we can be as good as we
want, but is it gonna actually arrive, um, you know, in the U S uh, and, and that has also worked
out. So that was also something I was like, maybe a little bit concerned. Thank you.
So earlier this week, we had a, a customer meeting with, with Wes and Hadley and somebody
had asked them both, who are their data heroes? And Wes McKinney pointed to you. And so I wanted
to ask you that question too. Who are your data heroes? Um, well, okay. Uh, I think that Hadley
is definitely one of my heroes. Uh, so I, one of the reasons I was extremely nervous about talking
at the Fawcett Conf this year was because I, it's just, I have talked in front of a hundred
thousand people, but somehow in front of Hadley was making me extremely nervous. So that, that was,
that was, uh, that was interesting to see also about myself. And I think it has to do with,
um, yeah, just, just, uh, you know, people that have, you know, managed, managed single-handedly
to turn the industry around, um, that, that, uh, yeah. Who are my heroes? Yeah. I think, I think
I have to, have to name Hadley, uh, and, uh, of course Wes, but I cannot say him. This would be
circular. So I would, uh, I would have to, I would have to think about that a bit more, but,
um, no, I think, I think I really, um, in my field in, in data management systems, it's really,
if you can show that people use your thing, then you have kind of won the argument. And I think
both, both, uh, Hadley and, uh, and Wes have shown this in, in, in a great sort of way.
And so for me also people like, um, you know, stone breaker, the, the Mike stone breaker,
the Turing Award winner, and one of the people behind Postgres is, is somebody who I look up to,
um, because just of the immense amount of impact they've had. Um, so, so yeah.
I love that. Thank you. I just put this up as a post on LinkedIn earlier today,
if anybody wants to go and add their own too. Hannes, we have one minute left here and I'm
wondering, was there anything you had to share with us today, whether that's, well, anything
top of mind for you or a meaningful piece of career advice or anything else you wanted to
share with us? Um, yeah, I think, um, first of all, I mean, I'm sorry, I couldn't answer
all the questions. Feel free to email me. Um, it's Hannes at duckdb.org. It's very easy.
Uh, if you have any sort of, uh, direct questions about, uh, to, to me, um, I'm not kind of,
can't promise I will, um, I will immediately answer, but career advice, I think the, I think
going for impact, uh, I think that's just, just, that's what I mentioned earlier with looking at
Reddit. If you, if you look at what will have the biggest sort of impact for the most people,
that's, that's something that, um, I think is worthwhile. Um, and, uh, yeah.
Thank you so much. Well, Hannes, I know we are the last call holding you off from your holiday
vacation right now, but thank you so much for joining us to close out a year of amazing
data science Hangouts and really appreciate you taking the time and thank you all who are here
and make this space what it is and join us week after week. Uh, we will be on a bit of a holiday
break until January 9th, where we'll be joined by Michael Chow and Rich Iannone at Posit who work
on the GT and Great Tables packages. But I wish you all a wonderful holiday season with your
friends and family and a happy new year. Thank you all. Thanks everyone. Bye everybody. Bye.
I love seeing the messages in the chat, so I'm not ending it yet,
but thank you all so much. There might be a survey that pops up at the end. If there's any
feedback or suggestions or things you want to share with us. Thank you all so much. Bye.